documentation/DISTRIBUTED.md, before:

# Distributed Training (Multi-node)

This document contains notes* on configuring a 4-way 8xH100 cluster for use with SimpleTuner.

> *This guide does not contain full end-to-end installation instructions. Instead, these serve as considerations to take when following the [INSTALL](/documentation/INSTALL.md) document or one of the [quickstart guides](/documentation/QUICKSTART.md).

## Storage backend

Multi-node training requires by default the use of shared storage between nodes for the `output_dir`


### Ubuntu NFS example

Just a basic storage example that will get you started.

#### On the 'master' node that will write the checkpoints

**1. Install NFS Server Packages**

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install nfs-kernel-server
```

**2. Configure the NFS Export**

Edit the NFS exports file to share the directory:

```bash
sudo nano /etc/exports
```

Add the following line at the end of the file (replace `slave_ip` with the actual IP address of your slave machine):

```
/home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output slave_ip(rw,sync,no_subtree_check)
```

*If you want to allow multiple slaves or an entire subnet, you can use:*

```
/home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output subnet_ip/24(rw,sync,no_subtree_check)
```

**3. Export the Shared Directory**

```bash
sudo exportfs -a
```

**4. Restart the NFS Server**

```bash
sudo systemctl restart nfs-kernel-server
```

**5. Verify NFS Server Status**

```bash
sudo systemctl status nfs-kernel-server
```

---

#### On the slave nodes that send optimiser and other states

**1. Install NFS Client Packages**

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install nfs-common
```

**2. Create the Mount Point Directory**

Ensure the directory exists (it should already exist based on your setup):

```bash
sudo mkdir -p /home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output
```

*Note:* If the directory contains data, back it up, as mounting will hide existing contents.

**3. Mount the NFS Share**

Mount the master's shared directory to the slave's local directory (replace `master_ip` with the master's IP address):

```bash
sudo mount master_ip:/home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output /home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output
```

**4. Verify the Mount**

Check that the mount is successful:

```bash
mount | grep /home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output
```

**5. Test Write Access**

Create a test file to ensure you have write permissions:

```bash
touch /home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output/test_file_from_slave.txt
```

Then, check on the master machine if the file appears in `/home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output`.

**6. Make the Mount Persistent**

To ensure the mount persists across reboots, add it to the `/etc/fstab` file:

```bash
sudo nano /etc/fstab
```

Add the following line at the end:

```
master_ip:/home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output /home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output nfs defaults 0 0
```

---

#### **Additional Considerations:**

- **User Permissions:** Ensure that the `ubuntu` user has the same UID and GID on both machines so that file permissions are consistent. You can check UIDs with `id ubuntu`.

- **Firewall Settings:** If you have a firewall enabled, make sure to allow NFS traffic. On the master machine:

  ```bash
  sudo ufw allow from slave_ip to any port nfs
  ```

- **Synchronize Clocks:** It's good practice to have both systems' clocks synchronized, especially in distributed setups. Use `ntp` or `systemd-timesyncd`.

- **Testing DeepSpeed Checkpoints:** Run a small DeepSpeed job to confirm that checkpoints are correctly written to the master's directory.


## Dataloader configuration

Very-large datasets can be a challenge to efficiently manage. SimpleTuner will automatically shard datasets over each node and distribute pre-processing across every available GPU in the cluster, while using asynchronous queues and threads to maintain throughput.

### Dataset sizing for multi-GPU training

When training across multiple GPUs or nodes, your dataset must contain enough samples to satisfy the **effective batch size**:

```
effective_batch_size = train_batch_size × num_gpus × gradient_accumulation_steps
```

**Example calculations:**

| Configuration | Calculation | Effective Batch Size |
|--------------|-------------|---------------------|
| 1 node, 8 GPUs, batch_size=4, grad_accum=1 | 4 × 8 × 1 | 32 samples |
| 2 nodes, 16 GPUs, batch_size=8, grad_accum=2 | 8 × 16 × 2 | 256 samples |
| 4 nodes, 32 GPUs, batch_size=8, grad_accum=1 | 8 × 32 × 1 | 256 samples |

Each aspect ratio bucket in your dataset must contain at least this many samples (accounting for `repeats`) or training will fail with a detailed error message.

#### Solutions for small datasets

If your dataset is smaller than the effective batch size:

1. **Reduce batch size** - Lower `train_batch_size` to reduce memory requirements
2. **Reduce GPU count** - Train on fewer GPUs (though this slows training)
3. **Increase repeats** - Set `repeats` in your [dataloader configuration](/documentation/DATALOADER.md#repeats)
4. **Enable automatic oversubscription** - Use `--allow_dataset_oversubscription` to automatically adjust repeats

The `--allow_dataset_oversubscription` flag (documented in [OPTIONS.md](/documentation/OPTIONS.md#allow_dataset_oversubscription)) will automatically calculate and apply the minimum required repeats for your configuration, making it ideal for prototyping or small dataset experiments.

### Slow image scan / discovery

The **discovery** backend currently restricts aspect bucket data collection to a single node. This can take an **extremely** long time with very-large datasets as each image has to be read from storage to retrieve its geometry.

To work-around this problem, the [parquet metadata_backend](/documentation/DATALOADER.md#parquet-caption-strategy--json-lines-datasets) should be used, allowing you to preprocess your data in any manner accessible to you. As outlined in the linked document section, the parquet table contains the `filename`, `width`, `height`, and `caption` columns to help quickly and efficiently sort the data into its respective buckets.


### Storage space

Huge datasets, especially when using the T5-XXL text encoder, will consume enormous quantities of space for the original data, the image embeds, and the text embeds.

#### Cloud storage

Using a provider such as Cloudflare R2, one can generate extremely large datasets with very little storage fees.

See the [dataloader configuration guide](/documentation/DATALOADER.md#local-cache-with-cloud-dataset) for an example of how to configure the `aws` type in `multidatabackend.json`

- Image data can be stored locally or via S3
  - If images are in S3, the preprocessing speed reduces according to network bandwidth
  - If images are stored locally, this does not take advantage of NVMe throughput during **training**
- Image embeds and text embeds can be separately stored on local or cloud storage
  - Placing embeds on cloud storage reduce the training rate very little, as they are fetched in parallel

Ideally, all images and all embeds are simply maintained in a cloud storage bucket. This greatly simplifies the risk of issues during pre-processing and resuming training.

#### Preserving filesystem scan caches

If your datasets so large that scanning for new images becomes a bottleneck, adding `preserve_data_backend_cache=true` to each dataloader config entry will prevent the backend from being scanned for new images.

**Note** that you should then use the `image_embeds` data backend type ([more information here](/documentation/DATALOADER.md#local-cache-with-cloud-dataset)) to allow these cache lists to live separately in case your pre-processing job is interrupted. This will prevent the **image list** from being re-scanned at startup.

#### Data compression

Data compression should be enabled by adding the following to `config.json`:

```json
{
    ...
    "--compress_disk_cache": true,
    ...
}
```

This will use inline gzip to reduce the amount of redundant disk space consumed by the rather-large text and image embeds.

## Configuring via 🤗 Accelerate

When using `accelerate config` (`/home/user/.cache/huggingface/accelerate/default_config.yaml`) to deploy SimpleTuner, these options will take priority over the contents of `config/config.env`

An example default_config for Accelerate that does not include DeepSpeed:

```yaml
# this should be updated on EACH node.
machine_rank: 0
# Everything below here is the same on EACH node.
compute_environment: LOCAL_MACHINE
debug: false
distributed_type: MULTI_GPU
downcast_bf16: 'no'
dynamo_config:
  dynamo_backend: NO
enable_cpu_affinity: false
main_process_ip: 10.0.0.100
main_process_port: 8080
main_training_function: main
mixed_precision: bf16
num_machines: 4
num_processes: 32
rdzv_backend: static
same_network: false
tpu_env: []
tpu_use_cluster: false
tpu_use_sudo: false
use_cpu: false
```

### DeepSpeed

This document doesn't go into as much detail as the [dedicated page](/documentation/DEEPSPEED.md).

When optimising training on DeepSpeed for multi-node, using the lowest-possible ZeRO level is **essential**.

For example, an 80G NVIDIA GPU can successfully train Flux with ZeRO level 1 offload, minimising overhead substantially.

Adding the following lines

```yaml
# Update this from MULTI_GPU to DEEPSPEED
distributed_type: DEEPSPEED
deepspeed_config:
  deepspeed_multinode_launcher: standard
  gradient_accumulation_steps: 1
  gradient_clipping: 0.01
  zero3_init_flag: false
  zero_stage: 1
```

### torch compile optimisation

For extra performance (with a drawback of compatibility issues) you can enable torch compile by adding the following lines into each node's yaml config:

```yaml
dynamo_config:
  # Update this from NO to INDUCTOR
  dynamo_backend: INDUCTOR
  dynamo_mode: max-autotune
  dynamo_use_dynamic: false
  dynamo_use_fullgraph: false
```

## Expected performance

- 4x H100 SXM5 nodes connected via local network
- 1TB of memory per node
- Training cache streaming from shared S3-compatible data backend (Cloudflare R2) in same region
- Batch size of **8** per accelerator, and **no** gradient accumulation steps
  - Total effective batch size is **256**
- Resolution is at 1024px with data bucketing enabled
- **Speed**: 15 seconds per step with 1024x1024 data when full-rank training Flux.1-dev (12B)

Lower batch sizes, lower resolution, and enabling torch compile can bring the speed into **iterations per second**:

- Reduce resolution to 512px and disable data bucketing (square crops only)
- Swap DeepSpeed from AdamW to Lion fused optimiser
- Enable torch compile with max-autotune
- **Speed**: 2 iterations per second

## Distributed training caveats

- Every node must have the same number of accelerators available
- Only LoRA/LyCORIS can be quantised, so full distributed model training requires DeepSpeed instead
- This is a very high-cost operation, and high batch sizes might slow you down more than you want, requiring scaling up the count of GPUs in the cluster. A careful balance of budgeting should be considered.
- (DeepSpeed) Validations might need to be disabled when training with DeepSpeed ZeRO 3
- (DeepSpeed) Model saving ends up creating weird sharded copies when saving with ZeRO level 3, but levels 1 and 2 function as expected
- (DeepSpeed) The use of DeepSpeed's CPU-based optimisers becomes required as it handles sharding and offload of the optim states.

Commit message:

add --vae_cache_disable to prevent writing VAE outputs to disk

documentation/DISTRIBUTED.md, after:

# Distributed Training (Multi-node)

This document contains notes* on configuring a 4-way 8xH100 cluster for use with SimpleTuner.

> *This guide does not contain full end-to-end installation instructions. Instead, these serve as considerations to take when following the [INSTALL](/documentation/INSTALL.md) document or one of the [quickstart guides](/documentation/QUICKSTART.md).

## Storage backend

Multi-node training requires by default the use of shared storage between nodes for the `output_dir`


### Ubuntu NFS example

Just a basic storage example that will get you started.

#### On the 'master' node that will write the checkpoints

**1. Install NFS Server Packages**

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install nfs-kernel-server
```

**2. Configure the NFS Export**

Edit the NFS exports file to share the directory:

```bash
sudo nano /etc/exports
```

Add the following line at the end of the file (replace `slave_ip` with the actual IP address of your slave machine):

```
/home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output slave_ip(rw,sync,no_subtree_check)
```

*If you want to allow multiple slaves or an entire subnet, you can use:*

```
/home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output subnet_ip/24(rw,sync,no_subtree_check)
```

**3. Export the Shared Directory**

```bash
sudo exportfs -a
```

**4. Restart the NFS Server**

```bash
sudo systemctl restart nfs-kernel-server
```

**5. Verify NFS Server Status**

```bash
sudo systemctl status nfs-kernel-server
```

---

#### On the slave nodes that send optimiser and other states

**1. Install NFS Client Packages**

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install nfs-common
```

**2. Create the Mount Point Directory**

Ensure the directory exists (it should already exist based on your setup):

```bash
sudo mkdir -p /home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output
```

*Note:* If the directory contains data, back it up, as mounting will hide existing contents.

**3. Mount the NFS Share**

Mount the master's shared directory to the slave's local directory (replace `master_ip` with the master's IP address):

```bash
sudo mount master_ip:/home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output /home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output
```

**4. Verify the Mount**

Check that the mount is successful:

```bash
mount | grep /home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output
```

**5. Test Write Access**

Create a test file to ensure you have write permissions:

```bash
touch /home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output/test_file_from_slave.txt
```

Then, check on the master machine if the file appears in `/home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output`.

**6. Make the Mount Persistent**

To ensure the mount persists across reboots, add it to the `/etc/fstab` file:

```bash
sudo nano /etc/fstab
```

Add the following line at the end:

```
master_ip:/home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output /home/ubuntu/simpletuner/output nfs defaults 0 0
```

---

#### **Additional Considerations:**

- **User Permissions:** Ensure that the `ubuntu` user has the same UID and GID on both machines so that file permissions are consistent. You can check UIDs with `id ubuntu`.

- **Firewall Settings:** If you have a firewall enabled, make sure to allow NFS traffic. On the master machine:

  ```bash
  sudo ufw allow from slave_ip to any port nfs
  ```

- **Synchronize Clocks:** It's good practice to have both systems' clocks synchronized, especially in distributed setups. Use `ntp` or `systemd-timesyncd`.

- **Testing DeepSpeed Checkpoints:** Run a small DeepSpeed job to confirm that checkpoints are correctly written to the master's directory.


## Dataloader configuration

Very-large datasets can be a challenge to efficiently manage. SimpleTuner will automatically shard datasets over each node and distribute pre-processing across every available GPU in the cluster, while using asynchronous queues and threads to maintain throughput.

### Dataset sizing for multi-GPU training

When training across multiple GPUs or nodes, your dataset must contain enough samples to satisfy the **effective batch size**:

```
effective_batch_size = train_batch_size × num_gpus × gradient_accumulation_steps
```

**Example calculations:**

| Configuration | Calculation | Effective Batch Size |
|--------------|-------------|---------------------|
| 1 node, 8 GPUs, batch_size=4, grad_accum=1 | 4 × 8 × 1 | 32 samples |
| 2 nodes, 16 GPUs, batch_size=8, grad_accum=2 | 8 × 16 × 2 | 256 samples |
| 4 nodes, 32 GPUs, batch_size=8, grad_accum=1 | 8 × 32 × 1 | 256 samples |

Each aspect ratio bucket in your dataset must contain at least this many samples (accounting for `repeats`) or training will fail with a detailed error message.

#### Solutions for small datasets

If your dataset is smaller than the effective batch size:

1. **Reduce batch size** - Lower `train_batch_size` to reduce memory requirements
2. **Reduce GPU count** - Train on fewer GPUs (though this slows training)
3. **Increase repeats** - Set `repeats` in your [dataloader configuration](/documentation/DATALOADER.md#repeats)
4. **Enable automatic oversubscription** - Use `--allow_dataset_oversubscription` to automatically adjust repeats

The `--allow_dataset_oversubscription` flag (documented in [OPTIONS.md](/documentation/OPTIONS.md#allow_dataset_oversubscription)) will automatically calculate and apply the minimum required repeats for your configuration, making it ideal for prototyping or small dataset experiments.

### Slow image scan / discovery

The **discovery** backend currently restricts aspect bucket data collection to a single node. This can take an **extremely** long time with very-large datasets as each image has to be read from storage to retrieve its geometry.

To work-around this problem, the [parquet metadata_backend](/documentation/DATALOADER.md#parquet-caption-strategy--json-lines-datasets) should be used, allowing you to preprocess your data in any manner accessible to you. As outlined in the linked document section, the parquet table contains the `filename`, `width`, `height`, and `caption` columns to help quickly and efficiently sort the data into its respective buckets.


### Storage space

Huge datasets, especially when using the T5-XXL text encoder, will consume enormous quantities of space for the original data, the image embeds, and the text embeds.

#### Cloud storage

Using a provider such as Cloudflare R2, one can generate extremely large datasets with very little storage fees.

See the [dataloader configuration guide](/documentation/DATALOADER.md#local-cache-with-cloud-dataset) for an example of how to configure the `aws` type in `multidatabackend.json`

- Image data can be stored locally or via S3
  - If images are in S3, the preprocessing speed reduces according to network bandwidth
  - If images are stored locally, this does not take advantage of NVMe throughput during **training**
- Image embeds and text embeds can be separately stored on local or cloud storage
  - Placing embeds on cloud storage reduce the training rate very little, as they are fetched in parallel

Ideally, all images and all embeds are simply maintained in a cloud storage bucket. This greatly simplifies the risk of issues during pre-processing and resuming training.

#### On-demand VAE encoding

For large datasets where storing cached VAE latents is impractical due to storage constraints or slow shared storage access, you can use `--vae_cache_disable`. This disables the VAE cache entirely, forcing the VAE to encode images on-the-fly during training.

This increases GPU computation load but significantly reduces storage requirements and network I/O for cached latents.

#### Preserving filesystem scan caches

If your datasets so large that scanning for new images becomes a bottleneck, adding `preserve_data_backend_cache=true` to each dataloader config entry will prevent the backend from being scanned for new images.

**Note** that you should then use the `image_embeds` data backend type ([more information here](/documentation/DATALOADER.md#local-cache-with-cloud-dataset)) to allow these cache lists to live separately in case your pre-processing job is interrupted. This will prevent the **image list** from being re-scanned at startup.

#### Data compression

Data compression should be enabled by adding the following to `config.json`:

```json
{
    ...
    "--compress_disk_cache": true,
    ...
}
```

This will use inline gzip to reduce the amount of redundant disk space consumed by the rather-large text and image embeds.

## Configuring via 🤗 Accelerate

When using `accelerate config` (`/home/user/.cache/huggingface/accelerate/default_config.yaml`) to deploy SimpleTuner, these options will take priority over the contents of `config/config.env`

An example default_config for Accelerate that does not include DeepSpeed:

```yaml
# this should be updated on EACH node.
machine_rank: 0
# Everything below here is the same on EACH node.
compute_environment: LOCAL_MACHINE
debug: false
distributed_type: MULTI_GPU
downcast_bf16: 'no'
dynamo_config:
  dynamo_backend: NO
enable_cpu_affinity: false
main_process_ip: 10.0.0.100
main_process_port: 8080
main_training_function: main
mixed_precision: bf16
num_machines: 4
num_processes: 32
rdzv_backend: static
same_network: false
tpu_env: []
tpu_use_cluster: false
tpu_use_sudo: false
use_cpu: false
```

### DeepSpeed

This document doesn't go into as much detail as the [dedicated page](/documentation/DEEPSPEED.md).

When optimising training on DeepSpeed for multi-node, using the lowest-possible ZeRO level is **essential**.

For example, an 80G NVIDIA GPU can successfully train Flux with ZeRO level 1 offload, minimising overhead substantially.

Adding the following lines

```yaml
# Update this from MULTI_GPU to DEEPSPEED
distributed_type: DEEPSPEED
deepspeed_config:
  deepspeed_multinode_launcher: standard
  gradient_accumulation_steps: 1
  gradient_clipping: 0.01
  zero3_init_flag: false
  zero_stage: 1
```

### torch compile optimisation

For extra performance (with a drawback of compatibility issues) you can enable torch compile by adding the following lines into each node's yaml config:

```yaml
dynamo_config:
  # Update this from NO to INDUCTOR
  dynamo_backend: INDUCTOR
  dynamo_mode: max-autotune
  dynamo_use_dynamic: false
  dynamo_use_fullgraph: false
```

## Expected performance

- 4x H100 SXM5 nodes connected via local network
- 1TB of memory per node
- Training cache streaming from shared S3-compatible data backend (Cloudflare R2) in same region
- Batch size of **8** per accelerator, and **no** gradient accumulation steps
  - Total effective batch size is **256**
- Resolution is at 1024px with data bucketing enabled
- **Speed**: 15 seconds per step with 1024x1024 data when full-rank training Flux.1-dev (12B)

Lower batch sizes, lower resolution, and enabling torch compile can bring the speed into **iterations per second**:

- Reduce resolution to 512px and disable data bucketing (square crops only)
- Swap DeepSpeed from AdamW to Lion fused optimiser
- Enable torch compile with max-autotune
- **Speed**: 2 iterations per second

## Distributed training caveats

- Every node must have the same number of accelerators available
- Only LoRA/LyCORIS can be quantised, so full distributed model training requires DeepSpeed instead
- This is a very high-cost operation, and high batch sizes might slow you down more than you want, requiring scaling up the count of GPUs in the cluster. A careful balance of budgeting should be considered.
- (DeepSpeed) Validations might need to be disabled when training with DeepSpeed ZeRO 3
- (DeepSpeed) Model saving ends up creating weird sharded copies when saving with ZeRO level 3, but levels 1 and 2 function as expected
- (DeepSpeed) The use of DeepSpeed's CPU-based optimisers becomes required as it handles sharding and offload of the optim states.
